{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 OpenSans;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 OpenSans-Semibold;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\author Aiden Price}
{\*\company Curtin University}}\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22880\viewh30280\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Web Services
\b0\fs28 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa400\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
The development of powerful and flexible web services was the foundation that allowed the mobile web to blossom. Basically defined, web services enable interaction between computer systems over a network. One system may call on another to provide data or a service without requiring a human user to mediate the interaction \{Anonymous:bRhwymPh\}. Mobile devices have limited processing power and storage available, so off-device storage and processing empowers on-device applications.\
Service Oriented Architectures (SOA) is a standard governing software design that aims to compose a software product from loosely coupled, and hence replaceable, components \{Endo:2010wf\}. The pattern is most commonly employed when designing web services as a method for distributed computing \{Palacios:2011eo\}. A set of descriptive XML documents, such as Web Services Description Language (WSDL), enable service builders to publish to service registries and then consumers to find and bind to services suited to their needs. Communication is carried out with XML based messages based on the Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP), another highly capable standard.\
Representational State Transfer (ReST) services are much easier to develop and consume \{Castillo:2011ve\}. The adoption of ReSTful services has led to an explosion of data available on the web, particularly with mobile applications in mind as the end consumers.\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa400\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Open Geospatial Consortium Web Map Service
\f0\b0 \
A Web Map Service (WMS) composes an image file from server stored vector and raster layers in response to a request in a URL. Despite their focus on returning an image file, WMS operations are still dependant upon XML, especially for GetCapabilities, GetFeatureInfo, error descriptions and layer style code. \
The open source and standards driven approach meant that WMS was widely adopted and became a cornerstone web mapping technology. The standard is now quite old, it was last updated to version 1.3.0 in 2006 \{delaBeaujardiere:2006vq\}.\

\f1\b Open Geospatial Consortium Web Feature Service
\f0\b0 \
A Web Feature Service (WFS) returns vector geographic data in GML (Geographic Markup Language, a derivative of XML) in response to a URL request. It is a more complex and capable service than WMS. If fully deployed, WFS allows external users full create, read, update and delete (CRUD) access to a geographic database \{Vretanos:2005ut\}.\
The WFS standard is of a similar age to WMS. Version 1.1.0 is most commonly deployed, dating from 2005 \{Vretanos:2005ut\}. Version 2.0 from 2010 gained capability and complexity from GML3 and somewhat simpler use from stored queries, but has not been widely adopted since release.\

\f1\b Google Maps Engine
\f0\b0 \
Google Inc.\'92s Google Maps Engine (GME) service enabled much more complex web mapping services to be built on top of Google Maps interface. Whereas the familiar Google Maps application only allowed one or two additional map layers to be displayed, Google Maps Engine could host many hundreds of datasets in the cloud and perform multi-layer geographic analysis \{Anonymous:s3eShq99\}. The full version was a true enterprise application and cloud service, with off-the-shelf or bespoke solutions created to suit a client\'92s needs. The scalability and reliability of Google\'92s service were a significant attractor to geospatial providers, such as Landgate.\
From the 22nd of November 2014 Google redirected traffic headed to the GME website to their Google Maps for Work service \{Anonymous:A_DLJUOY\}, a more streamlined approach to providing enterprise mapping solutions than the previous five separate products. \
In a commercial decision, Google Inc. announced the deprecation of the GME API on the 29th of January 2015 \{Anonymous:2015tg\}. The whole service was shuttered on the 29th of January 2016.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Esri ArcGIS for Server and ArcGIS REST API\
\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sa400\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf0 ArcGIS for Server is Esri\'92s enterprise level product for intra/internet GIS and provisioning web services \{Anonymous:BHtz-GD9\}. ArcGIS for Server has a long development history and has been an established (or entrenched rather) product in geospatial enterprises for many years.\
The ArcGIS REST API exposes ArcGIS for Server data and functions as web services. This modern API has been fully developed since 2010 \{Anonymous:hoTu0aor\}. ArcGIS for Server\'92s age means it is also fully capable of supporting older web service standards such as SOAP.}